Minions are small, yellow creatures who have existed since the beginning of time, evolving from single-celled organisms into beings who exist only to serve history's most villainous masters.[14] After serving a great deal of masters over the centuries, they find they enjoy serving humans the most. However, after a disastrous end to their service to Napoleon, the Minions are driven into isolation and decide to start a new life in a massive cave in Antarctica. All goes well at first, but after many years, the Minions become restless and undriven without a master to serve. To regain their dignity and sense of purpose, one Minion, Kevin, decides to set out to find a new boss and asks for help. He only receives help from Stuart, a musically inclined Minion who is blissfully unaware of what he has been chosen for; and Bob, a young and inexperienced but infectious Minion who tends to befriend anyone he meets and is the only one who knows what Kevin is doing. Kevin and his friends then leave.

The trio journey to New York City where the year is 1968. After spending the day attempting to blend in, the Minions end up in a department store for the night where they see a hidden commercial broadcast for villains advertising Villain-Con; a convention for villains and supervillains in Orlando. The trio manage to hitchhike a ride with a family of villains called the Nelsons and impress them with their accidental villainy. Once at the convention, they meet Scarlet Overkill, the first female supervillain, and they impress her enough for her to hire them. Kevin contacts the other Minions, who had found a new boss, but their service is interrupted when they accidentally kill him and are chased out of their cave. They make their way to England to find Kevin, Bob, and Stuart. Taking the three to her home in London, Scarlet and her husband Herb explain their plan to steal St. Edward's Crown from Queen Elizabeth II of England and promise to reward the Minions if they are successful in stealing it, threatening bodily harm if they aren't. Herb supplies them with inventions to aid in the heist, but they are nearly caught when they break into the Tower of London, which leads to a highly publicized chase that ends with Bob crashing into the Sword in the Stone and pulling it free, becoming King of England. Enraged by this, Scarlet confronts the Minions, who claim that their intention was to give her the crown; Bob changes the law to allow him to pass it to her. Undeterred because she feels betrayed, Scarlet imprisons the three in a dungeon to be tortured by Herb before her coronation, but afterwards they are left alone and escape.

Making their way to Westminster Abbey, the three of them interrupt the coronation by accidentally sending a chandelier down on Scarlet, who immediately orders their execution. Dozens of villains chase them and Bob and Stuart are caught while Kevin finds his way into a pub. Scarlet threatens to kill Stuart and Bob at dawn if Kevin doesn't show up. Kevin sneaks into Scarlet's home to steal weapons, but inadvertently triggers an untested machine Herb was building and grows over one-hundred feet in height. He tramples through London, rescuing his friends just as the other Minions reunite with them. Scarlet tries to eradicate them, but Kevin defends them, swallowing a massive missile while being pulled through the air by Scarlet's rocket-powered dress. The missile detonates, apparently killing Kevin and the Overkills. After briefly mourning him, the Minions are overjoyed when Kevin reappears, having returned to his normal size. After Bob gives Elizabeth her crown back, she rewards him with a tiny crown for his teddy bear, Stuart, along with an electric guitar that he calls a "Mega Ukulele" and she knights Kevin for his heroism. Elizabeth suddenly realizes that her crown is missing, and Kevin leads a chase after Scarlet and Herb, who are fleeing through the crowd until they are suddenly frozen in place by a young Gru, who steals the bejeweled crown from them and takes off in a rocket-powered motorbike while the Minions stare in awe. Realizing that they have found a new, cunning boss, they let Bob give the golden crown to the frozen Scarlet whose hand is still moving and give chase to follow him home.